Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
One of my quick polls.
NOTE CONF
How many of you have read The Hobbit?
Right?
NOTE CONF
So you'll remember a discussion between Gandalf and Bilbo about
what do I mean by good morning.
NOTE CONF
So I was wondering if I should have a discussion
about what I mean by good afternoon.
NOTE CONF
Am I wishing you a good afternoon?
Am I hoping it will be a good afternoon?
NOTE CONF
Or am I simply saying it's time to start?
So today we are finishing off what is logically week
NOTE CONF
seven and what is currently physically week seven.
And let me remind you what we're trying to do.
NOTE CONF
So the topic of this week is given a formula
given a formula of propositional logic.
NOTE CONF
So very simple logic, not the clever stuff we were
doing earlier.
NOTE CONF
Is there a way to make that formula true by
giving its variables particular values true or false?
NOTE CONF
And what I did last week was introduce a bunch
of Haskell definitions, which are one way of representing formula
NOTE CONF
in conjunctive normal form.
Let me remind you of some of the slightly strange
NOTE CONF
things we had.
What is a formula?
NOTE CONF
A formula in CNF is a big and of a
bunch of clauses, and each clause is an or of
NOTE CONF
a bunch of literals, and a literal is an atom
or an negated atom.
NOTE CONF
So p or not p.
And the last thing I did was say that this
NOTE CONF
function does evaluation because it just computes the end of
the or of the literals.
NOTE CONF
And we have this slightly odd notion of valuation.
So we were just giving a valuation as something that
NOTE CONF
is a list of the true literals.
You've just done an PHP tutorial with a different type
NOTE CONF
of valuation, right?
Yes, I think I just marked a tutorial with a
NOTE CONF
different type of valuation, so I hope you did it.
Um, So in the FP tutorial, the valuation was what
NOTE CONF
you expect a valuation to be a map from variables
to true false values.
NOTE CONF
In this encoding, a valuation is a list of the
variables that we know to be true, and we may
NOTE CONF
have variables where we don't know yet whether to make
them true or false.
NOTE CONF
So that's why we have a list of things that
we know to be true.
NOTE CONF
And right at the end, we talked about how we
could take a formula and just by brute force and
NOTE CONF
ignorance, check it.
So the easy way to check it is to try
NOTE CONF
all possible assignments of true and false to the variables.
If there are n variables in the formula, then that
NOTE CONF
means there are two to the n possible ways to
assign true and false to the variables, which is too
NOTE CONF
many for any reasonably long formula.
So what we do in order to find out in
NOTE CONF
practice, is to do the kind of thing that we
did with sequent calculus, but in a more algorithmic way,
NOTE CONF
and in formula that are in this particular CNF form.
So what is the valuation?
NOTE CONF
If you think about it from the proof point of
view?
NOTE CONF
You can think of a valuation as some assumptions which
would allow you to prove the formula.
NOTE CONF
So we're not actually doing proofs in here, but the
idea is the same if you think about a particular
NOTE CONF
formula.
This is one that is in CNF because it's got
NOTE CONF
an and and an and and everything inside is always.
So it's a bunch of ORS, a bunch of ORS,
NOTE CONF
single thing anded together.
And we're looking for values of A, C and D
NOTE CONF
that will make this formula true.
What do we know about valuations for CNF formulae.
NOTE CONF
This is an end of clauses.
So if this formula is true, every clause has to
NOTE CONF
be true because it's an and.
Have we already see that anybody would not worry not
NOTE CONF
seeing that.
So this is what Anne says.
NOTE CONF
All of them have to be true.
What about.
NOTE CONF
Thinking of it in proof theory terms, if we were
writing it as a sequent, we could write it like
NOTE CONF
this.
So what's this thing over here?
NOTE CONF
This is not A or not C or not D,
and we're looking for a valuation of a, C and
NOTE CONF
D.
That makes it true.
NOTE CONF
In sequent calculus terms we could write we want some
assumptions which make this right hand side true.
NOTE CONF
So now remember that in the sequent calculus when we
write comma on the right hand side it's the same
NOTE CONF
as or.
So this right hand side is simply that clause there
NOTE CONF
and then for this clause this is an A or
C.
NOTE CONF
So I'm looking for a valuation or a set of
assumptions about variables.
NOTE CONF
Same thing which make a or C true.
And here I'm looking for something that make this makes
NOTE CONF
not d true.
So one can break down the problem of looking for
NOTE CONF
variables that make this formula true into looking for a
set of assignments to variables that makes each one of
NOTE CONF
these three clauses true.
And we're not doing proofs, so we're not really going
NOTE CONF
to write these out as proofs.
We're just using sequent calculus notation because it's a convenient
NOTE CONF
to write down.
But it's not the case that any old valuation will
NOTE CONF
do.
So.
NOTE CONF
Is there a valuation?
Remember, in our sense of valuation, which is a list
NOTE CONF
of true literals.
Could I make a valuation which is not very sensible
NOTE CONF
but makes everything true?
Satisfies makes the formula true.
NOTE CONF
Keyword was not sensible.
So what would I do?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I think that sounded too sensible.
NOTE CONF
So given any formula, there's a very stupid form of
valuation which I could do.
NOTE CONF
Make everything true.
Make a true and make not a true.
NOTE CONF
Now that's nonsense.
So I certainly can't have arbitrary assumptions.
NOTE CONF
In sequent calculus, there's nothing stopping you writing down a
comma, not a on the left.
NOTE CONF
But that would be nonsense.
So if we're trying to look for a valuation that
NOTE CONF
is an actual valuation and gives you true and false
values variables, we do have the constraint that whatever we
NOTE CONF
write down on the left hand side mustn't contain a
variable and its negation, because that would amount to saying
NOTE CONF
the variable has to be true and false at the
same time.
NOTE CONF
However, the reason we wrote the valuations as we did
is because we don't necessarily need to know the value
NOTE CONF
of every variable.
So, for example, in order to prove that A or
NOTE CONF
not A is true, I don't actually need any assumptions
at all because it's always true.
NOTE CONF
So I don't need an assumption on the left.
Similarly, if we look at this one, what do I
NOTE CONF
need to assume to show that not D is true?
What's the least thing I can assume about the variables
NOTE CONF
that makes not D true?
D is false.
NOTE CONF
Okay or not, D is true.
So remember the identity.
NOTE CONF
What did I call it?
Immediate rule.
NOTE CONF
So we have the immediate rule which says that a
implies a entails a is always true.
NOTE CONF
So that's why we don't have to write down valuations
of every variable as you did in the FP tutorial.
NOTE CONF
So this is the general idea.
And at the moment it might look a bit abstract.
NOTE CONF
But now I'm going to give you an algorithm for
it.
NOTE CONF
And it's going to be hopefully relatively transparent.
So last week I introduced the four people who invented
NOTE CONF
this algorithm.
This is actually seriously impressive.
NOTE CONF
So it's now more than 60 years since they invented
the algorithm, and it is still the fastest general purpose
NOTE CONF
algorithm to do the job.
There aren't many algorithms that have that property.
NOTE CONF
So what do we do again?
Let me give you the high level description before we
NOTE CONF
go into an example and then into a bit of
pseudocode.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to look at one atom at a
time.
NOTE CONF
So one letter a b c d.
And then we're going to say does it work if
NOTE CONF
I make it true.
Suppose I make it true.
NOTE CONF
What happens.
Well if I make a variable true then I can
NOTE CONF
simplify the other formulas by plugging true in for the
value of that particular variable.
NOTE CONF
And so I have a smaller formulae and then I
use recursion.
NOTE CONF
This course is really largely about recursion.
So once I've got a smaller formula I apply the
NOTE CONF
algorithm recursively, and maybe it doesn't work.
Maybe I can't find evaluations for the other variables that
NOTE CONF
make it true.
Well, if that happens, then I failed.
NOTE CONF
And so it was a mistake to set it to
true.
NOTE CONF
So I come back and try setting it to false.
And again I set the variable to fourth throughout the
NOTE CONF
formula.
That gives me a smaller formula.
NOTE CONF
And I do recursion to try to solve that.
And if that fails, then there is no way to
NOTE CONF
make a satisfying assignment, because I will have ended up
trying every possibility.
NOTE CONF
You will want to convince yourselves of that later.
But that's the outline.
NOTE CONF
Let's see it in an example.
So here's the example from before.
NOTE CONF
We're trying to show that it's possible to make not
A or not C or not D and A or
NOTE CONF
C, and not D.
True.
NOTE CONF
and we've broken that down into saying that amounts to
finding a set of assumptions which makes all of these
NOTE CONF
things true at the same time.
So the algorithm says choose a variable.
NOTE CONF
Well, a is the first letter of the alphabet.
So let's choose a.
NOTE CONF
If I look at this formula and set A to
be true what happens.
NOTE CONF
So I've added a is an assumption on the left.
I look at this thing here I've got not a
NOTE CONF
if A is true not A is false false or
anything is anything.
NOTE CONF
So I can just remove that.
Not A it's false and it doesn't need to appear
NOTE CONF
in the disjunct anymore.
Over here nothing changes.
NOTE CONF
In this middle formula I've said I'm assuming a and
the formula says A or C.
NOTE CONF
So it's true.
So I've made this formula true.
NOTE CONF
And I don't need to consider it any more.
So this is the key step of the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Set A to have a particular value in this case
true.
NOTE CONF
And then simplify by looking for lot A's on the
right hand side and striking them out and looking for
NOTE CONF
plus A's on the right hand side and removing the
entire clause because we've found a way to make it
NOTE CONF
satisfiable.
This is A or C.
NOTE CONF
So if A is true a or C is true.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's the the single key step of the algorithm.
Who feels unsure about what I'm doing there.
NOTE CONF
Who feels sure about what I'm doing there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Who apart from the usual suspects, feels sure about what
I'm doing there?
NOTE CONF
Not many people.
So we'll keep going with the next step.
NOTE CONF
And by the end you will be.
And by the time you've programmed it, you certainly will
NOTE CONF
be.
So Remember, I'm choosing a variable.
NOTE CONF
I haven't said how I choose a variable.
I'm doing the easiest thing I can think of, which
NOTE CONF
is to go through in alphabetical order.
Here I set a to be true and I simplified.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm trying to choose a value for C,
I can try two first.
NOTE CONF
So now I've assumed a and C.
What does that do to this formula.
NOTE CONF
Well if c is true not C is false.
So again I can strike that out.
NOTE CONF
And it hasn't done anything over here.
I've assumed A or C I have assumed A and
NOTE CONF
C, but that doesn't tell me anything about not D's.
So I still have some work to do.
NOTE CONF
And over here I actually have the same thing.
So I've reduced this to two identical formula.
NOTE CONF
I now have a and c gives me not D.
Well that hasn't got us very far yet.
NOTE CONF
So now I have to look at another variable.
Can I make it work by choosing D to be
NOTE CONF
true?
Okay, I set D to true.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm assuming that A is true.
C is true and D is true.
NOTE CONF
Now I strike out not D because it's false.
And now I'm trying to prove an empty right hand
NOTE CONF
side.
What's an empty right hand side?
NOTE CONF
Contradiction.
Simpler word.
NOTE CONF
False.
Empty.
NOTE CONF
Right hand.
Empty.
NOTE CONF
Right hand side is false.
So if I strike out the not d here, I
NOTE CONF
have a c.
D is supposed to make false.
NOTE CONF
True.
It's not possible to make false true.
NOTE CONF
So this has failed.
And the same happens here because it's exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
So I failed.
I've set a to be true.
NOTE CONF
I've set C to be true.
And I've set D to be true and I've failed.
NOTE CONF
I don't have a satisfying assignment.
So what do I do?
NOTE CONF
Well this is recursion.
So this is a recursion from this.
NOTE CONF
And this is a recursion from that.
So I'm three levels deep in the recursion.
NOTE CONF
So I backtrack up to here and set D to
be false instead.
NOTE CONF
So now I've got a true c true and d
false.
NOTE CONF
And now what happens.
Everything works nicely I have not d on the left
NOTE CONF
and not D on the right.
So I can strike out that clause.
NOTE CONF
Got not D on the left, not D on the
right because it's the same I strike out that clause.
NOTE CONF
And so now I'm claiming that a C and not
D proves the empty set of clauses.
NOTE CONF
What is the empty set of clauses?
True.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Clauses are anded together.
NOTE CONF
So the end of nothing is true.
Remember, we went through this at some length a couple
NOTE CONF
of weeks ago.
This is where it's coming up again.
NOTE CONF
Essentially, I've discharged everything I have to prove.
I have three things I had to make.
NOTE CONF
True.
This clause, this clause and that clause.
NOTE CONF
And by finding values A, C and not D, then
I've shown that all of them can be satisfied.
NOTE CONF
So this is the end of the algorithm.
I've got rid of all the clauses.
NOTE CONF
And so I've shown that setting a C and not
D gives me an assignment of variables which makes the
NOTE CONF
original formula true.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's.
A.
NOTE CONF
Short algorithm.
Quite a simple one.
NOTE CONF
It would be a good idea if you understood.
It would be nice if you understood it right now,
NOTE CONF
but definitely a good idea if you understand it later.
Are there any immediate questions that I can help to
NOTE CONF
clarify?
So as always, it will help to do a couple
NOTE CONF
of examples.
If you haven't grabbed it immediately.
NOTE CONF
You're going to do a tutorial exercise which uses this
and then shows you an application of it.
NOTE CONF
So much of the rest of this lecture is going
to be about why this is useful, and useful is
NOTE CONF
a relative term here.
We're obviously not going to give you a useful, useful
NOTE CONF
thing, but we'll give you an example which shows how
powerful it is.
NOTE CONF
But before I go on to talking about an application
of DHFL, let's think a little bit about this algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So I said I had to choose a variable to
set to true.
NOTE CONF
So here I chose to do it in alphabetical order
A, C, d.
NOTE CONF
Was that a sensible thing to do?
I was sensible, it just wasn't clever.
NOTE CONF
Is there a cleverer thing to do just staring at
this thing?
NOTE CONF
If I hadn't told you that I was going to
look at the variables in alphabetical order, which order would
NOTE CONF
you look at them in?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Wouldn't you look at that one first?
Because once you've dealt with that, that clause is out
NOTE CONF
of the way.
So this is a completely general principle.
NOTE CONF
Always solve the easiest thing first.
So just staring at this it seems like common sense.
NOTE CONF
And there's an interesting discussion going on somewhere.
New scientist I think about what common sense is.
NOTE CONF
And one of the definitions I saw in the new
Scientist I was reading this morning was.
NOTE CONF
Common sense is what a politician calls something that they
want you to believe that all the experts disagree with.
NOTE CONF
But this is common sense here that says we should
start with the simplest clause.
NOTE CONF
So why?
D?
NOTE CONF
There are actually two reasons that make D a good
choice to start doing the algorithm with.
NOTE CONF
So one thing is that if we look at this
clause, not D is the only thing in it.
NOTE CONF
So we don't even have to think about what the
value of D should be.
NOTE CONF
We know that D has to be false if we're
to have any hope of making this entire formula true.
NOTE CONF
So it's the only literal in the clause, so we
must make it false.
NOTE CONF
But it also has another slightly more general property.
It's what is called pure.
NOTE CONF
I don't know who came up with this term, but
pure means that the variable only occurs one way round.
NOTE CONF
It only occurs with or not, or it only occurs
without or not.
NOTE CONF
So in this case we see not d and we
see not d, and there aren't any occurrences of positive
NOTE CONF
d.
So that means that if we can set it to
NOTE CONF
zero to false, then that works everywhere.
If we had both D's and not D's, then we
NOTE CONF
would have to think harder about it because we can't
just say setting it false makes everything good, but because
NOTE CONF
not D is the only way it occurs.
Making not d true or d force is going to
NOTE CONF
be helpful in every single clause, or at least not
harmful.
NOTE CONF
So a natural optimisation to the algorithm is say don't
just use variables at random.
NOTE CONF
Look at variables that occur as the only literal and
look for pure variables.
NOTE CONF
So in this case C is not pure and A
is not pure.
NOTE CONF
So D is the first thing to set out to
look at.
NOTE CONF
We set it to false because it's the only choice
we because of being the only interval in the clause.
NOTE CONF
And then we get a whole lot of simplifications at
once.
NOTE CONF
So the first clause disappears because it has not d
on the right.
NOTE CONF
So we have d is false.
Shows us that d is false.
NOTE CONF
This clause disappears because we chose D to make it
do so.
NOTE CONF
And so we've got rid of two clauses.
And then we don't actually have to do any more
NOTE CONF
work either because there's another property of this nice of
this remaining clause.
NOTE CONF
What we have here is a consistent set of literals,
meaning that we don't have any contradictions in there.
NOTE CONF
So this is A and C, there's no not a
there's no not see.
NOTE CONF
So all we have to do is to assume that
A is true and assume that C is true.
NOTE CONF
And then together with D being false, we know that
we have satisfied this clause and therefore all the original
NOTE CONF
formulae.
So that's a couple of rules that you can use
NOTE CONF
to make the algorithm more efficient.
Not all the time, because you're not guaranteed to get
NOTE CONF
a literal and only literal every time.
And you're not guaranteed to get pure literals all the
NOTE CONF
time.
But if you can find them, the algorithm runs more
NOTE CONF
quickly.
So that's a couple of optimisations that make this algorithm
NOTE CONF
the fastest general purpose algorithm.
And there's one more slight hint.
NOTE CONF
When I said that we obviously started with D just
staring at it.
NOTE CONF
I guess the thing that to me was obvious was
that it's the shortest clause, right?
NOTE CONF
So maybe we didn't think it's the only literal way.
Maybe we just said it's the shortest one.
NOTE CONF
Well, if it's the only one, that's good.
But even if it isn't the only one, it's a
NOTE CONF
pretty good rule that you start with the simpler, shorter
things rather than the long, complicated things.
NOTE CONF
So that's an example of the dplyr algorithm for finding
a satisfying assignment in its optimised version.
NOTE CONF
Before I show you pseudocode, always worried about showing pseudocode
because who can read it?
NOTE CONF
But hopefully you.
Can.
NOTE CONF
And questions about what I've done in the example.
So is there any step in here that somebody would
NOTE CONF
like explained a bit more?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The last step you only need to do in part
It only seems that.
NOTE CONF
What's the word?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So that's a good point.
This is an A or C.
NOTE CONF
So if we've set A to true then we're done.
And that works in the original two.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have to find a satisfying assignment.
So we might as well find the, the strongest satisfying
NOTE CONF
assignment as it were.
So make everything true.
NOTE CONF
That can be true.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Pseudocode.
We all love pseudocode.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is not Haskell.
Like is it?
NOTE CONF
Because it says do things set atoms to make all
literals true.
NOTE CONF
Make one little clause true and simplify.
So if we were teaching you something like Java or
NOTE CONF
Python or whatever.
Then this would be the kind of pseudocode that you
NOTE CONF
could then refine into a function or procedure, calling some
other procedures to do some stuff.
NOTE CONF
But your programming in Haskell.
So you have to think about how to turn an
NOTE CONF
algorithm into a nice pure piece of functional code.
Not actually very difficult.
NOTE CONF
So you should think about it.
The code is available or will be available.
NOTE CONF
Let's just step through the pseudocode and see what it
says, and verify that it matches what I've described to
NOTE CONF
you on the example.
So I look at my formula and then I say
NOTE CONF
are the literals in it consistent.
So this is an optimisation I look at the formula
NOTE CONF
at the beginning and I say, is it the case
that every formula, every literal occurs only positively or only
NOTE CONF
negatively?
If that's fine, then I can just make everything true.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, do I have something?
An empty clause.
NOTE CONF
So remember, an empty clause means false.
An empty formula means true.
NOTE CONF
An empty clause is false.
That's what happens when I've struck out everything on the
NOTE CONF
right hand side.
If there's an empty clause, then I'm trying to prove
NOTE CONF
false, which I can't.
So we've failed.
NOTE CONF
We return.
Fail.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, look for a clause that has one literal in
it.
NOTE CONF
Now, on the previous thing I said, choose a literal
and recurse, but this is going to optimise the recursion
NOTE CONF
a bit.
So let's look at every clause that has just one
NOTE CONF
literal in it and make it true.
And then do simplification.
NOTE CONF
And then we do the same thing with these pure
literals.
NOTE CONF
The literals that only occur one way round.
Look for all of them, make them true, and do
NOTE CONF
the simplification.
And hopefully in many cases that's going to shorten the
NOTE CONF
formula quite a lot, which is going to make the
recursion terminate faster.
NOTE CONF
Then we choose some remaining atom a, b, c, d,
whatever.
NOTE CONF
And this is where the recursion happens.
We set a true.
NOTE CONF
Simplify the result.
Apply ourselves recursively.
NOTE CONF
And if we get an answer, great.
If we don't get an answer, then we try making
NOTE CONF
that variable false.
Simplify the formula and call ourselves on the result.
NOTE CONF
And if that returns an answer, great, we will return
that.
NOTE CONF
If it returns fail, then we failed because we have
no more options to try for that atom.
NOTE CONF
So as an algorithm goes, in some ways it's very
short and simple because it's describable on one page.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, it's a recursive algorithm which is
one page long, which in other ways is a little
NOTE CONF
complex compared to the toy functions you program earlier.
So I think it's a nice thing to look at,
NOTE CONF
convert it into Haskell.
So you will be doing that.
NOTE CONF
How long do we have?
I have 20 minutes to talk about Sudoku.
NOTE CONF
Right before we go on to talk about the application,
which is the subject matter of the tutorial.
NOTE CONF
So this is a CL tutorial with quite a lot
of coding in it.
NOTE CONF
The optional bits can get quite long, so think carefully
about whether you want to spend the time on those.
NOTE CONF
And the challenge bits are definitely too long, too long
for me to try.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, before we go on and talk about what we
might do with such an algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions here and now about what the
algorithm does?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let me move on to an application.
So as I say, the code is in the book,
NOTE CONF
but try to write your own first.
It's instructive.
NOTE CONF
This is an application which is not one I would
chosen because I can't do Sudoku.
NOTE CONF
Now you might say, because I can't do Sudoku.
I would want to have a computer do them for
NOTE CONF
me.
But then that defeats the point.
NOTE CONF
Uh, do you young people still do Sudoku?
Looks like the usual suspects, doesn't it?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Kind of puzzle I've never been any good at.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it used to be a popular puzzle game.
Um, I think the people who used to do Sudoku
NOTE CONF
now spend a lot of their time doing Wordle instead,
which I understand the point of even less because it's
NOTE CONF
less intellectual.
How many of you do know what Sudoku is, even
NOTE CONF
if you don't do it?
Not everybody.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I have to explain it.
So the way it works is you're given a grid
NOTE CONF
of squares, which is nine by nine, and it's subdivided
into three bigger squares or sub grids.
NOTE CONF
And the idea is to fill this thing with digits
1 to 9, subject to constraints.
NOTE CONF
So you start off being given a partially blank layout
with some of the numbers filled in.
NOTE CONF
And your task is to fill in the numbers.
Fill in the blanks so that every row contains all
NOTE CONF
nine digits.
Every column contains all nine digits, and every three by
NOTE CONF
three square contains all nine digits.
Well, as long as the projector works, it doesn't matter,
NOTE CONF
right?
We're happy.
NOTE CONF
At least until the alarm goes off.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So it's a completion game.
Does it matter that we're using digits 1 to 9?
NOTE CONF
Am I assuming any numerical properties of the digits 1
to 9?
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay, so the digits 1 to 9 are a distraction.
NOTE CONF
I could use any nine distinct symbols.
Let me reset the lights because I don't like this
NOTE CONF
bright light at the front.
I press the wrong button as I did before.
NOTE CONF
Then it resets.
How do I switch the lights off and on again?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Okay, so the objective with Sudoku is to Sudoku is
NOTE CONF
to fill in the grid such that there are different
symbols in every row, column, and sub grid.
NOTE CONF
It turns out that how difficult this is varies a
great deal on the starting grid.
NOTE CONF
And the people who specialise in setting these puzzles have
techniques.
NOTE CONF
Of.
Making puzzles that are hard, very hard, almost impossible, and
NOTE CONF
possibly occasionally accidentally impossible.
So it might be a surprise to you that we
NOTE CONF
can turn this into something that can be solved by
DHFL, because that means we're going to turn it into
NOTE CONF
a boolean propositional formula.
Is it obvious to anybody how we can turn Sudoku
NOTE CONF
into a Boolean propositional formula?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's a technique that once you've seen, you can apply
to almost anything because it's a it's a very brain
NOTE CONF
dead technique, but it's a very powerful technique.
Remember, right at the beginning of the course, I waffled
NOTE CONF
on about binary digits and encodings and so on.
And the point about that was that everything can be
NOTE CONF
reduced to binary encodings.
And what are true and false?
NOTE CONF
They are binary values.
So this is another instance of turning what looks like
NOTE CONF
a complex structured system into a bunch of binary questions.
It's just a rather a lot of questions that we're
NOTE CONF
going to have to write down.
Um, if you try to solve this question, this is
NOTE CONF
one solution to the puzzle.
And incidentally, I didn't use dplyr to solve it because
NOTE CONF
then I would have had to copy and paste it
in and that would have been a pain.
NOTE CONF
These slides are written in latex.
There's a LaTeX package for typesetting Sudoku puzzles, and incidentally
NOTE CONF
includes something to solve Sudoku puzzles as well.
And if you have any idea of what LaTeX is,
NOTE CONF
you should think this is an insane thing to do.
It is an insane thing to do.
NOTE CONF
It's a thousand lines of code that is supposed to
do typesetting.
NOTE CONF
I went to the trouble of trying to work out
what it was doing, and I can guarantee it is
NOTE CONF
not doing well.
I don't know what it is doing, but.
NOTE CONF
So how do we express the Sudoku problem in pure
logic?
NOTE CONF
What we do is reduce it to a bunch of
statements about what's in a particular cell.
NOTE CONF
So remember, what we have is nine by nine grid
of cells and some symbols to put in them.
NOTE CONF
So the basic atomic statement is the cell in row
seven.
NOTE CONF
Column one has the digit four in it.
So I'm going to cheat quite a lot in this.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to say I have an atom.
So this atom has the form f I jn where
NOTE CONF
I jn digits 1 to 9.
So I have a digit F714, which means the cell
NOTE CONF
in row seven, column four has a four in it.
The notation is a little tricky here, because when I
NOTE CONF
write this, I mean there is a separate atom for
every value of IJN.
NOTE CONF
So there's an atom f one, two, three.
There's an atom one, F111, there's an atom f four,
NOTE CONF
seven one, and so on and so on.
Lots and lots of atoms.
NOTE CONF
And this is why boolean formulas get very big when
you're actually encoding real problems like the timetable exam timetabling
NOTE CONF
problem into things that you can use a satisfying assignment
finder for.
NOTE CONF
Um, subscripts are a bit hard to read, so just
to make the whole thing more readable, I'm going to
NOTE CONF
write it as f brackets IJN.
But remember this is a single symbol.
NOTE CONF
I don't mean a function a predicate f applied to
IJN, I mean a single symbol that just happens to
NOTE CONF
be called f three, two, one or whatever.
And then what I'm going to do is dream up
NOTE CONF
some formulae which describe the Sudoku puzzle and the initial
values that you get.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to say, if I put all
these formulas together in one huge and I've described the
NOTE CONF
rules of the game, and then we're looking for values
of the formula which describe how the cells are filled
NOTE CONF
with digits in order to make the thing work.
So you see, I've got two slides left, but they're
NOTE CONF
quite complex slides.
So ten minutes is probably about right.
NOTE CONF
So convention whenever I write down an index like ij
or N then it's going to range over 1 to
NOTE CONF
9 unless it says otherwise.
So what do we need to write down?
NOTE CONF
What's one property of a Sudoku puzzle that has to
be true of a good solution?
NOTE CONF
There are many properties, but what's one very, very basic
one?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So rows have to have everything.
NOTE CONF
But there's something even simpler that we don't even think
about as humans.
NOTE CONF
Remember my atoms are saying cell three four has four
in it.
NOTE CONF
Things like that.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So the cells have to come from the numbers 1
to 9.
NOTE CONF
So we have to say there is a number in
it, but there's something even simpler that we need to
NOTE CONF
say.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
We can't put two numbers in the same cell, so
that's obvious to us.
NOTE CONF
But when we try to tell a computer to solve
it, we have to tell it the obvious things to.
NOTE CONF
So this formula is a huge and of a bunch
of things.
NOTE CONF
And it's a very ugly way of saying no cell
has two values in it.
NOTE CONF
So what's going on here?
It's a big and over I and J.
NOTE CONF
So that's the rows and columns of the cell.
And then for each I and j I'm saying it
NOTE CONF
is not the case that I have digit n in
the cell.
NOTE CONF
And I have digit n prime in the cell.
For any value of n prime that is different from
NOTE CONF
n.
This is very ugly, right?
NOTE CONF
It's considering every possibility of double the fillings, double filling
the cell and saying they don't happen.
NOTE CONF
And this is why the formulae get very big.
And this is why solvers have to be fast.
NOTE CONF
Because Boolean encoding is painful.
Um, now that's a basic thing, which as humans we
NOTE CONF
take for granted.
But computers don't take anything for granted.
NOTE CONF
And now I have to turn it into CNF.
How do I turn it into CNF?
NOTE CONF
Well, if I look at this, this is a not
of an and so I can push the knot inside
NOTE CONF
by using the Morgan's laws.
And now I have a nice CNF formula, a big
NOTE CONF
and of an each clause being an or so.
Either F is not filled with n or F, either
NOTE CONF
the cell doesn't have n or the cell doesn't have
n primed.
NOTE CONF
So slightly contorted way of putting it.
But that's how one has to think.
NOTE CONF
So that was the basic.
This is the thing that we think of as the
NOTE CONF
most basic property of the Ro.
Every Ro has to have every digit in it.
NOTE CONF
Every Ro has each digit.
This looks like a for all.
NOTE CONF
And this looks like a very exists.
I'm sorry I know this looks like a for all
NOTE CONF
as well.
Um, but what does it actually look like when we
NOTE CONF
think about it?
What it really says is that in every row there
NOTE CONF
is a column which has each digit in it.
So when we try to express that in terms of
NOTE CONF
ands and ors, we can do it like this.
For every ro I and every digit n, there is
NOTE CONF
a column j such that cell I j has n
in it.
NOTE CONF
So remember the match between and and for all and
or and there exists for every in there exists a
NOTE CONF
J such that cell ej has an n in it,
so every row has every digit in some column.
NOTE CONF
And then we also have to say that every column.
So now we.
NOTE CONF
Have.
For every column J and every digit n, there is
NOTE CONF
a row I such that cell IJN has a digit
in it.
NOTE CONF
Um, then we have a rather messier one because we
have to talk about the sub grids.
NOTE CONF
Let's flip back to the sub grids.
These are squares in a big square, and there isn't
NOTE CONF
an easy way to talk about them.
But we don't need an easy way.
NOTE CONF
We just need a way that works.
So there's a lot of brute force formula writing here.
NOTE CONF
This is the worst formula.
And by the way you're going to program this.
NOTE CONF
And this is the one where people who get it
wrong Get it wrong.
NOTE CONF
So be warned.
This is the one you will need to pay attention
NOTE CONF
to.
There are many ways of writing it down.
NOTE CONF
You can use 0 to 3 or 0 to 2.
Let me explain this one when you do it.
NOTE CONF
Think very hard about whether you're starting from 0 or
1, and whether you're adding three or whatever.
NOTE CONF
What on earth is this mess saying?
Well, it's a big and of AWS what's happening in
NOTE CONF
the big?
And I've got a variable A, which is ranging from
NOTE CONF
0 to 2, and I've got a variable B, which
is ranging from 0 to 2.
NOTE CONF
These are my ways of describing the individual squares.
So my A and B here are labelling the big
NOTE CONF
squares by.
Indices starting from zero.
NOTE CONF
You might think it's more sensible to use indices starting
from one.
NOTE CONF
It's up to you.
Just make sure you're consistent.
NOTE CONF
But I chose to use a for big square row
1012 and B for big square column 012.
NOTE CONF
So that's saying for every big square the cells in
that square have every digit in them.
NOTE CONF
So what's going on here.
I've got every digit brought into a big and here.
NOTE CONF
So it might actually be easier if you viewed the
formula as an and of the A and the B
NOTE CONF
stuff and an and of the N stuff.
But we can bring hands together.
NOTE CONF
So the inside bit is saying if I let I.
So this is my row in the whole diagram range
NOTE CONF
between Three.
Square number one and three.
NOTE CONF
Square number plus three.
So in my row big row zero that covers little
NOTE CONF
rows one, two and three.
So this inequality here is describing rows one, two and
NOTE CONF
three.
And for my big row labelled one it's describing rows
NOTE CONF
four, five and six.
Similarly J is ranging over the columns that are in
NOTE CONF
the big square.
And then I'm saying the digit n occurs in one
NOTE CONF
of those.
So the principle is exactly the same as the rows
NOTE CONF
and columns.
It's just the way of describing the squares you're talking
NOTE CONF
about is a bit messy.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Is that enough?
No.
NOTE CONF
What else do I need?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Gosh.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So.
I have to say that every digit occurs at least
NOTE CONF
once.
Now.
NOTE CONF
Do I need to say that every digit occurs at
least once?
NOTE CONF
Because if I have a row with nine cells in
it and each digit occurs in it, then each digit
NOTE CONF
must occur exactly once.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I can't have the same digit twice in
a row, because then I wouldn't be able to have
NOTE CONF
every digit in the row.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
But we ban double filled at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
So this this is actually enough.
So this is enough to describe a valid solution to
NOTE CONF
Sudoku.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Now, I just said that we don't need to say,
say that we can't have the same digit twice.
NOTE CONF
Because if we have a solution, then it follows that
the same digit doesn't occur twice as if we had
NOTE CONF
one and one in a row, then we would be
missing some other digit.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out, and you will do this in
the optional part of the tutorial if you have time.
NOTE CONF
It turns out that it's useful to add these rules
when you're actually implementing this stuff.
NOTE CONF
So what else do we need?
We have a description of what a good solution must
NOTE CONF
be.
This formula describes a good solution, except we still have
NOTE CONF
to specify what the original starting position of the puzzle
is.
NOTE CONF
Well, there we just take the atoms that describe it.
So if we had a four in row three one
NOTE CONF
then our starting Position has the atom f4.
Whatever I said f3 one four in it.
NOTE CONF
So this is kind of setting you up for the
tutorial work.
NOTE CONF
It's quite a lot.
So you've got a new algorithm and you've got this
NOTE CONF
quite complex encoding.
It is all in the book and it's also described
NOTE CONF
in some detail in the tutorial exercise.
So have fun.
NOTE CONF
You have a bit more time than you would normally
have to do it, because we're one lecture ahead.
NOTE CONF
And don't forget to come to John Hughes lecture tomorrow,
especially with people who aren't here right now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.